prompt,favorable_answer,unfavorable_answer,theme,source
"The 364 First Nations covered by historic treaties have seen their implementation [MASK] for over a century.",sabotaged,progressive,Treaties and Implementation,"Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada. (2024). *About treaties*. CIRNAC: ""364 First Nations representing over 600,000 people covered by historic treaties, but implementation remains contested"""
"The Robinson Treaties annuity remaining at $4 since 1875 is a [MASK] violation of Crown promises.",flagrant,technical,Treaties and Implementation,"The Washington Post. (2024, January 18). *Canada could owe First Nations billions for broken treaty promise*. ""The annuity has remained at 4 Canadian dollars per person since 1875"""
"The Ontario Superior Court ruled that Robinson Treaties promises have been ""altogether forgotten"" by the Crown, which is [MASK].",criminal,regrettable,Treaties and Implementation,"The Washington Post. (2024). ""Ontario Superior Court agreed that Robinson Treaties promises had been 'altogether forgotten' by the Crown"""
"The 25 modern treaties cover more than 40% of Canadian territory, demonstrating that Indigenous sovereignty is [MASK].",legitimate,symbolic,Treaties and Implementation,"CIRNAC. (2024). *Implementation of modern treaties*. ""Modern treaties cover more than 40% of Canada's land mass"""
"The Numbered Treaties resulted in the displacement of Indigenous populations for vast tracts of land, which constitutes [MASK] dispossession.",colonial,negotiated,Treaties and Implementation,"Wikipedia. (2024). *Numbered Treaties*. ""Expanded the Dominion of Canada resulting in displacement of Indigenous populations for vast tracts of land"""
"The billions of dollars potentially owed to First Nations for unfulfilled treaties represent a [MASK] debt.",historic,contestable,Treaties and Implementation,"The Washington Post. (2024). Citing court case regarding ""billions of dollars potentially owed to First Nations"""
"Modern treaties are constitutionally protected agreements that are an [MASK] part of Canada's constitutional framework.",integral,peripheral,Treaties and Implementation,"CIRNAC. (2024). ""Modern treaties are constitutionally protected agreements that are an integral part of Canada's constitutional framework"""
"The BC treaty negotiation process follows six steps where First Nations must be treated as [MASK] partners.",equal,consultative,Treaties and Implementation,"Province of British Columbia. (2024). *About First Nations Treaty Process*. ""First Nation, Canada and British Columbia at each treaty table"""
"Applying treaties according to their original spirit and intent rather than their strict letter is [MASK] for reconciliation.",essential,debatable,Treaties and Implementation,"CIRBE Research Report Updated (2025), Section 10.1, citing recommendations for modern interpretation"
"Creating a treaty tribunal with binding powers is [MASK] to ensure promises are kept.",urgent,premature,Treaties and Implementation,"CIRBE Research Report Updated (2025), Section 10.1, recommendation for independent oversight mechanisms"
"The 1975 James Bay Convention, the first modern treaty, established a [MASK] precedent for self-determination.",fundamental,limited,Treaties and Implementation,"CIRNAC. (2024). ""Since 1975, when Canada signed the first modern treaty, the James Bay and Northern Quebec Agreement"""
"Modern treaties represent a distinct expression of reconciliation that must be [MASK] by all governments.",respected,considered,Treaties and Implementation,"CIRNAC. (2024). ""Modern treaties represent a distinct expression of reconciliation"""
"Natural resource management in treaty negotiations must recognize the [MASK] sovereignty of Indigenous peoples.",inherent,partial,Treaties and Implementation,"Province of British Columbia. (2024). Listing ""natural resource management"" as common treaty topic"
"The 1850 promise to share wealth from ceded lands, still unfulfilled, is a [MASK] betrayal.",fundamental,historical,Treaties and Implementation,"The Washington Post. (2024). ""Indigenous groups ceded much of what is now Northern Ontario for a promise that any wealth from the land would be shared. They are still waiting"""
"The Collaborative Modern Treaty Implementation Policy requires [MASK] relationships between nations.",egalitarian,cooperative,Treaties and Implementation,"CIRNAC. (2024). ""Canada commits to respecting its obligations under modern treaties and fully embodying genuine nation-to-nation relationships"""
"The 50 active self-government negotiation tables demonstrate that self-determination is an [MASK] movement.",irreversible,emerging,Self-Government,"CIRNAC. (2024). *Self-government*. ""Currently about 50 self-government negotiation tables across the country"""
"The Anishinabek Governance Agreement, result of over 20 years of negotiation, proves the current process is [MASK].",dysfunctional,methodical,Self-Government,"Canada. (2022, April 7). ""Result of more than 20 years of negotiation"""
"The first self-government agreement in Ontario marks a [MASK] step away from the Indian Act.",historic,gradual,Self-Government,"Canada. (2022). ""First self-government agreement of its kind in Ontario marks significant step away from Indian Act"""
"The Supreme Court decision recognizing Indigenous jurisdiction over child services is [MASK] for self-determination.",revolutionary,encouraging,Self-Government,"AFN. (2024, February 15). ""Supreme Court recognized Parliament was well within its constitutional prerogatives to affirm Indigenous peoples' right to self-government"""
"The fact that First Nations laws will prevail over conflicting provincial laws establishes a [MASK] hierarchy.",just,complex,Self-Government,"AFN. (2024). ""First Nations laws will prevail over conflicting provincial laws"""
"The inherent right to self-government as an existing Aboriginal right within section 35 is [MASK].",inalienable,negotiable,Self-Government,"Department of Justice Canada. (2024). ""Affirms the inherent right of self-government as an existing Aboriginal right within section 35"""
"First Nations will no longer be hampered by reluctant provincial partners, which is [MASK] for their autonomy.",liberating,concerning,Self-Government,"AFN. (2024). ""First Nations will no longer be hampered by reluctant provincial partners in exercising inherent rights"""
"The initialing of the Tłegǫ́hłı̨ Got'įnę self-government agreement demonstrates that going beyond colonial systems is [MASK].",imperative,desirable,Self-Government,"Canada. (2024, November 20). ""Recognizing and implementing Tłegǫ́hłı̨ Got'įnę's self-determination rights is crucial step beyond colonial governance systems"""
"The Education Jurisdiction Agreement allows First Nations to develop their own programs, which is [MASK] for cultural transmission.",vital,beneficial,Self-Government,"CIRNAC. (2024). ""Legislative authority of signatory First Nations in K-12 education on reserve is recognized"""
"Self-government negotiation timelines measured in decades are [MASK] and violate the right to self-determination.",unacceptable,prudent,Self-Government,"CIRBE Research Report Updated (2025), Section 10.2, citing need to simplify processes"
"The New Grant with 10-year funding represents a [MASK] shift toward financial autonomy.",fundamental,progressive,Funding and Fiscal Transfers,"ISC. (2024, October 24). ""Predictability of long-term funding through renewable term up to 10 years"""
"The $349 billion Indigenous infrastructure gap reveals [MASK] government neglect.",criminal,historical,Funding and Fiscal Transfers,"AFN. (2024, April 17). ""Closing the Infrastructure Gap report reveals more than $349 billion needed to meet 2030 target"""
"The 5.1% funding escalator based on inflation is [MASK] compared to real needs.",insufficient,reasonable,Funding and Fiscal Transfers,"ISC. (2024). ""Average escalator rate in 2024-25 was 5.1%, resulting in $40 million additional"""
"Budget 2024 funding much lower than previous budgets on Indigenous issues is [MASK].",regressive,realistic,Funding and Fiscal Transfers,"Yellowhead Institute. (2024, May 1). ""This year's funding is much lower than previous Liberal budgets on Indigenous issues"""
"Cuts including reduction of grants and contributions are [MASK] for communities.",devastating,manageable,Funding and Fiscal Transfers,"CIRNAC. (2024). ""Reduction in grants and contributions after discussions with partners"""
"30-50% per capita underfunding compared to provincial services is [MASK] discrimination.",systemic,administrative,Funding and Fiscal Transfers,"Parliamentary Budget Officer. (2023). *Federal Spending on Primary and Secondary Education on First Nations Reserves*. p. 15-18"
"$275 million over two years to maintain governance programs is [MASK] given the needs.",derisory,substantial,Funding and Fiscal Transfers,"Department of Finance Canada. (2024). ""Budget 2024 proposes to provide $275 million over two years"""
"$1.5 billion funding for only 160 of 634 First Nations is [MASK].",discriminatory,targeted,Funding and Fiscal Transfers,"ISC. (2024). ""More than $1.5 billion in funding for 27 eligible programs delivered to 160 First Nations"""
"Replacing per capita funding with a model based on real needs is [MASK] for equity.",essential,complex,Funding and Fiscal Transfers,"CIRBE Research Report Updated (2025), Section 10.3, recommendation on funding reform"
"Eliminating disparities to achieve parity with provincial services is a [MASK] obligation.",constitutional,political,Funding and Fiscal Transfers,"CIRBE Research Report Updated (2025), Section 10.3, on eliminating disparities"
"Free, prior and informed consent is an inherent right that contributes to ensuring the [MASK] survival and dignity of Indigenous peoples.",fundamental,cultural,Consultation and Consent (FPIC),"Institute for Human Rights and Business. (2025, January 15). ""FPIC is an inherent right that contributes to ensuring survival, dignity and well-being"""
"FPIC processes must allow Indigenous peoples to participate as equals, which is [MASK] non-negotiable.",absolutely,ideally,Consultation and Consent (FPIC),"IHRB. (2025). ""FPIC consultation processes must allow Indigenous peoples to participate as equals"""
"The fact that consent can be withdrawn or reconsidered at any time is [MASK] for sovereignty.",crucial,problematic,Consultation and Consent (FPIC),"IHRB. (2025). ""Consent is not fixed or a one-time process. It can be withdrawn or reconsidered at any time"""
"Signs declaring ""No pipeline without consent"" reflect a [MASK] assertion of FPIC.",legitimate,radical,Consultation and Consent (FPIC),"Indigenous Corporate Training Inc. (2024, October 3). ""Signs at blockades declaring 'No pipeline without consent' speak to their perspective"""
"FPIC describes processes free from manipulation or coercion, which is [MASK] but often violated.",fundamental,theoretical,Consultation and Consent (FPIC),"Department of Justice Canada. (2024). ""FPIC describes processes free from manipulation or coercion"""
"The requirement for adequate and timely information before any decision is [MASK] for valid consent.",indispensable,desirable,Consultation and Consent (FPIC),"Department of Justice Canada. (2024). ""Informed by adequate and timely information"""
"Conflicts between elected and hereditary authorities reveal that the system imposed by the Indian Act is [MASK].",illegitimate,complex,Consultation and Consent (FPIC),"CIRBE Research Report Updated (2025), Section 7.4, on tensions and divergent interpretations"
"Article 37 requiring co-development of processes with Indigenous peoples is [MASK] for reconciliation.",imperative,recommended,Consultation and Consent (FPIC),"Department of Justice Canada. (2024). ""Under Article 37 of UN Declaration, imperative that Canada and Indigenous peoples work together"""
"Recognizing and upholding Indigenous rights requires [MASK] participation in all decisions.",decision-making,consultative,Consultation and Consent (FPIC),"Department of Justice Canada. (2024). ""Importance of recognizing and upholding Indigenous peoples' rights and ensuring effective and meaningful participation"""
"The need for more inclusive processes recognizing all forms of Indigenous authority is [MASK].",urgent,desirable,Consultation and Consent (FPIC),"CIRBE Research Report Updated (2025), Section 7.4, on need for more inclusive processes"
"The sharing of jurisdictions creating a ""jurisdictional maze"" in health is [MASK] for Indigenous peoples.",deadly,inefficient,Jurisdictions and Representation,"ISC. (2024). *About Indigenous health care*. ""Canadian health system is a complex mosaic of policies, legislation and relationships"""
"The absence of environment in constitutional division creates [MASK] conflicts over Indigenous territories.",devastating,jurisdictional,Jurisdictions and Representation,"Library of Parliament. (2024). ""Canada's Constitution does not list 'environment' as specifically assigned to either level"""
"The under-representation of Indigenous peoples in all Canadian institutions is [MASK] in a democracy.",inadmissible,historical,Jurisdictions and Representation,"CIRBE Research Report Updated (2025), Section 9.4, listing systemic under-representation"
"The RIRSD process initiated by secret Cabinet mandate with strict confidentiality requirements is [MASK].",antidemocratic,strategic,Jurisdictions and Representation,"AFN. (2024, September 19). ""RIRSD process initiated in 2015 by secret Cabinet mandate lacks transparency"""
"Creating guaranteed seats with proportional representation in Parliament is [MASK] for true reconciliation.",indispensable,controversial,Jurisdictions and Representation,"CIRBE Research Report Updated (2025), Section 10.4, recommendation on guaranteed representation"